# News
News relating to the research article 'Visualisation tools for dependent peptide searches to support the exploration of *in vitro* protein modifications' by Preston and co-authors (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0235263)
## Update regarding the apparent absence of BSA Cys-34 modifications
*Posted to the [article's comments section](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/comments?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0235263) on 17 Oct 2021*

BACKGROUND/PROBLEM. In our article, we predicted that *N*-ethylmaleimide (NEM) would modify BSA Cys-34. We tested this prediction by using Script IV to analyse the results of a series of dependent peptide (DP) searches. Script IV has the ability to link modifications to a given experimental condition (NEM treatment): firstly, it identifies DPs that were detected in both of two analyses of a test sample; then, it excludes any DPs that were detected in either of two analyses of a control sample (untreated BSA). Surprisingly, the script did not localise any putative NEM-derived modifications to Cys-34. In this update, I address the apparent absence of the expected modifications.

METHODS. MaxQuant search results were re-analysed using variants of Script IV. Two mass-shifts were considered: +68.03 Da (the mass-difference between NESyl and carbamidomethyl) and +86.04 Da (the mass-difference between hydrolysed NESyl and carbamidomethyl). The ‘treated_constant.DPs’ tables generated by Script IV were inspected. Data for DPs with the expected combination of sequence (GLVLIAFSQYLQQCPFDEHVK), modification site (Cys) and mass-shift were extracted from the search results. Precursor-ion intensities were summed across the extracted DPs, and the sums of intensities were compared across different LC-MS/MS analyses. The results of a variable-modification search were searched manually (for details of this search, see pages 3-4 of the article and file S1 Text of the supporting information).

RESULTS/DISCUSSION. Inspection of the ‘treated_constant.DPs’ tables revealed that putative NEM-derived modifications had been localised to GLVLIAFSQYLQQCPFDEHVK in all four analyses (i.e., not only in the analyses of NEM-treated BSA, but also in the control analyses). For NEM-treated BSA (analytical replicate 1), localisation probabilities tended to identify Cys-34 as the site of modification (67% of relevant features). The apparent absence of BSA Cys-34 modifications in the earlier investigation is therefore explained as follows: these modifications were in fact present, but Script IV interpreted them as ‘background’ and excluded them.

The localisation of one of the putative modifications (+86.04 Da) to Cys-34 in NEM-treated BSA was confirmed by the variable-modification search.* Notably, the quantity of relevant DPs, as judged from summed ion intensities, was always at least two orders of magnitude lower for the control sample than for NEM-treated BSA.

A plausible explanation for the above results is that the control analyses were contaminated by a small amount of ‘carry-over’ from earlier analyses.** Another, perhaps less plausible explanation is that both samples contained bona fide background modifications whose mass-shifts were the same as those of the NEM-derived modifications.

CONCLUSIONS
1. It appears that putative carry-over/interference in the control analyses caused the NEM-derived BSA Cys-34 modifications to be handled as if they were ‘background’.
2. Script IV is very sensitive to interference or contamination. The same can be assumed to be true of Scripts II and III. This is worth bearing in mind when interpreting visualisations generated by Scripts II, III and IV.
3. The ‘treated_constant.DPs’ table generated by Script IV can be useful for diagnosing problems associated with contamination and interference.

FOOTNOTES

\* The results of this search were only ever used to corroborate DP search results. This is why the Cys-34 modification did not show up in S1 Table of the supporting information.

** We did not see the putative contamination/interference in the earlier investigation because most of our analyses were focused on the ‘obvious’ NEM-derived mass shifts (i.e., +125.05 Da and +143.06 Da).

## Update regarding dependent-peptide matching
*Posted to the [article's comments section](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/comments?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0235263) on 14 Feb 2021*

BACKGROUND. Scripts II, III and IV perform pairwise comparisons of dependent peptides (DPs; handled as combinations of sequence and mass shift). If two DPs share the same sequence, and their mass shifts are close enough, they are considered to match.

PROBLEM. Script III is inappropriately matching DPs with the annotations ‘Comp.:13C-12C’ and ‘Deamidation’. Other problematic pairs are ‘di-Oxidation/Sulfide’ and ‘Comp.:S-NH3O/Comp.:O-NH3’. Further pairs with very close shifts could also be problematic. Script II matches DPs using the same basic method as Script III, and will be similarly affected. Script IV uses a different method, and may not be affected to the same extent.

SOLUTIONS. For Script III, I have identified three potential solutions: (i) excluding interfering modifications (e.g., ‘Comp.:13C-12C’); (ii) requiring annotations to match; and (iii) halving the tolerance. I tested these solutions by making variants of Script III and reprocessing the BSA data reported in the paper. A match was considered inappropriate if the DPs’ annotations were different. The matching of unannotated DPs with different mass shifts was not tested for presently (however, see CONCLUSIONS).

RESULTS. While none of the solutions is perfect, each was effective in reducing the frequency with which differentially annotated DPs were matched (from 32 observations to 0-6 observations). For each solution, only a modest (<8%) change in the overall number of DPs post enrichment was observed. There was no change in the number of marker DPs (mass shift = 125 or 143 Da) observed pre or post enrichment. There was only a modest decrease in the calculated enrichment factor for the marker DPs (from 6.0 to 5.7-5.8).

CONCLUSIONS. Users could implement a solution that is appropriate to their experiment. A good general solution seems to be reducing the tolerance, because this does not require affected DPs to have been annotated.
